chore: Update docs for offline and online stores (#2946)
feast-dev/feast: docs/how-to-guides/adding-a-new-offline-store.md

In this guide, we will show you how to extend the existing File offline store and use in a feature repo. While we will be implementing a specific store, this guide should be representative for adding support for any new offline store.

> The full working code for this guide can be found at [feast-dev/feast-custom-offline-store-demo](https://github.com/feast-dev/feast-custom-offline-store-demo) and an example of a custom offline store that was contributed by developers can be found [here](https://github.com/feast-dev/feast/pull/2401).

Reviewer: idk if I would use this as an example. It's a really large PR with also online store + registry store components

Would be better if we created some example PR (similar to what is in this guide)

Reviewer: Could you convert the dummy example in the guide into an actual PR so they can see? 

You can also just point users to the directory that has the offline / online store implementations too

The full working code for this guide can be found at [feast-dev/feast-custom-offline-store-demo](https://github.com/feast-dev/feast-custom-offline-store-demo).

The process for using a custom offline store consists of 8 steps:

1. Defining an `OfflineStore` class.
2. Defining an `OfflineStoreConfig` class.
3. Defining a `RetrievalJob` class for this offline store.
4. Defining a `DataSource` class for the offline store
5. Referencing the `OfflineStore` in a feature repo's `feature_store.yaml` file.
6. Testing the `OfflineStore` class.
7. Updating dependencies.
8. Adding documentation.

## 1. Defining an OfflineStore class

{% hint style="info" %}
&#x20;OfflineStore class names must end with the OfflineStore suffix!
{% endhint %}

### Contrib offline stores

New offline stores go in `sdk/python/feast/infra/offline_stores/contrib/`.

#### What is a contrib plugin?

- Not guaranteed to implement all interface methods
- Not guaranteed to be stable.
- Should have warnings for users to indicate this is a contrib plugin that is not maintained by the maintainers.

> #### How do I make a contrib plugin and "official" plugin?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### How do I make a contrib plugin an "official" plugin?
```

Author: fixed.

To move an offline store plugin out of contrib, you need:

> - Github actions (i.e `make test-python-integration`) is setup to run all tests against the offline store and pass.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- GitHub actions (i.e `make test-python-integration`) is setup to run all tests against the offline store and pass.
```

Author: fixed

> - At least two contributors own the plugin (ideally tracked in our OWNERS / CODEOWNERS file).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- At least two contributors own the plugin (ideally tracked in our `OWNERS` / `CODEOWNERS` file).
```

Author: fixed

&#x20;OfflineStore class names must end with the OfflineStore suffix!
{% endhint %}

### Contrib

> Generally, new offline stores should go in the contrib folder and should have warnings within the classes that state the offline store is in alpha status. The contrib folder is designated for community contributions that are not fully maintained by Feast maintainers and may contain potential instability and have API changes. It is recommended to add warnings to users that the offline store functionality is still in alpha development and is not fully stable. In order to be classified as fully stable and be moved to the main offline store folder, the offline store should integrate with the full integration test suite in Feast and pass all of the test cases.

Reviewer: This is generally pretty hard to read imo. Can you make this simpler and more scannable?

e.g. 

### Contrib offline stores
New offline stores go in `sdk/python/feast/infra/offline_stores/contrib/`.

**What is a contrib plugin?**
- Not guaranteed to implement all interface methods
- Not guaranteed to be stable
- Should have warnings for users to indicate this is contrib

**How do I make a contrib plugin an "official" plugin?**
To move an offline store plugin out of contrib, you need:
- GitHub actions (i.e. `make test-python-integration`) is setup to run all tests against the offline store and pass.
- At least two contributors own the plugin (ideally tracked in an OWNERS / CODEOWNERS)

The OfflineStore class contains a couple of methods to read features from the offline store. Unlike the OnlineStore class, Feast does not manage any infrastructure for the offline store.&#x20;

> There are two methods that deal with reading data from the offline stores`get_historical_features`and `pull_latest_from_table_or_query`.

Reviewer: this seems to contradict the text you have below

* `pull_latest_from_table_or_query` is invoked when running materialization (using the `feast materialize` or `feast materialize-incremental` commands, or the corresponding `FeatureStore.materialize()` method. This method pull data from the offline store, and the `FeatureStore` class takes care of writing this data into the online store.
* `get_historical_features` is invoked when reading values from the offline store using the `FeatureStore.get_historical_features()` method. Typically, this method is used to retrieve features when training ML models.

> * `pull_all_from_table_or_query` is a method that pulls all the data from an offline store from a specified start date to a specified end date.

Reviewer: might call out that this method is optional since it is only used to work with SavedDatasets

Author: I think you commented on the wrong method , you mean write_logged_features right?

Reviewer: nope. pull_all_from_table_or_query right now in our logic is only exposed for SavedDatasets afaict

* `write_logged_features` is a method that takes a pyarrow table or a path that points to a parquet file and writes the data to a defined source defined by `LoggingSource` and `LoggingConfig`.
* `offline_write_batch` is a method that supports directly pushing a pyarrow table to a feature view. Given a feature view with a specific schema, this function should write the pyarrow table to the batch source defined. More details about the push api can be found [here](docs/reference/data-sources/push.md).

{% code title="feast_custom_offline_store/file.py" %}

> ```python

Reviewer: would print the "alpha" warnings in these code snippets

Author: done.

The `RetrievalJob` interface exposes two methods - `to_df` and `to_arrow`. The expectation is for the retrieval job to be able to return the rows read from the offline store as a parquet DataFrame, or as an Arrow table respectively.

> Users who want to have their offline store support batch materialization (detailed in this [RFC](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1J7XdwwgQ9dY_uoV9zkRVGQjK9Sy43WISEW6D5V9qzGo/edit#heading=h.9gaqqtox9jg6)) will also need to implement `to_remote_storage` to write distribute the reading and writing of offline store records to a distributed framework. If this functionality is not needed, the RetrievalJob will default to local materialization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Users who want to have their offline store support scalable batch materialization for online use cases (detailed in this [RFC](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1J7XdwwgQ9dY_uoV9zkRVGQjK9Sy43WISEW6D5V9qzGo/edit#heading=h.9gaqqtox9jg6)) will also need to implement `to_remote_storage` to write distribute the reading and writing of offline store records to a distributed framework. If this is not implemented, Feast will default to local materialization (pulling all records in memory to materialize).
```

The `RetrievalJob` interface exposes two methods - `to_df` and `to_arrow`. The expectation is for the retrieval job to be able to return the rows read from the offline store as a parquet DataFrame, or as an Arrow table respectively.

> Users who want to have their offline store support scalable batch materialization for online use cases (detailed in this [RFC](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1J7XdwwgQ9dY_uoV9zkRVGQjK9Sy43WISEW6D5V9qzGo/edit#heading=h.9gaqqtox9jg6)) will also need to implement `to_remote_storage` to distribute the reading and writing of offline store records to a distributed framework. If this is not implemented, Feast will default to local materialization (pulling all records into memory to materialize).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Users who want to have their offline store support scalable batch materialization for online use cases (detailed in this [RFC](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1J7XdwwgQ9dY_uoV9zkRVGQjK9Sy43WISEW6D5V9qzGo/edit#heading=h.9gaqqtox9jg6)) will also need to implement `to_remote_storage` to distribute the reading and writing of offline store records to blob storage (such as S3). This may be used by a custom [Materialization Engine](https://github.com/feast-dev/feast/blob/master/sdk/python/feast/infra/materialization/batch_materialization_engine.py#L72) to parallelize the materialization of data by processing it in chunks. If this is not implemented, Feast will default to local materialization (pulling all records into memory to materialize).
```

Author: fixed

After implementing these classes, the custom offline store can be used by referencing it in a feature repo's `feature_store.yaml` file, specifically in the `offline_store` field. The value specified should be the fully qualified class name of the OfflineStore.&#x20;

> As long as your OfflineStore class is available in your Python environment, it will be imported by Feast dynamically at runtime. It is crucial to specify the type as the package that Feast can import.

Reviewer: Might be more clear if you left this as a comment in the example `feature_store.yaml`

## 6. Testing the OfflineStore class

> ### Contrib

Reviewer: This doesn't seem like it logically belongs under "testing" ?

Author: Moved to `Defining an OfflineStore class`

> Generally, new offline stores should go in the contrib folder and have alpha functionality tags. The contrib folder is designated for community contributions that are not fully maintained by Feast maintainers and may contain potential instability and have API changes. It is recommended to add warnings to users that the offline store functionality is still in alpha development and is not fully stable. In order to be classified as fully stable and be moved to the main offline store folder, the offline store should integrate with the full integration test suite in Feast and pass all of the test cases.

Reviewer: alpha functionality tags is ambiguous imo.

Maybe say our standard is to print messages stating it's alpha status? This is also where a sample simple PR we provide is useful

```
make test-python
```
This should run the unit tests and the unit tests should all pass. Please add unit tests for your data source that test out basic functionality of reading and writing to and from the datasource. This should just be class level functionality that ensures that the methods you implemented for the OfflineStore and the DataSource associated with it work as expected. In order to be approved to merge into Feast, these unit tests should all pass and demonstrate that the DataSource works as intended.

The universal tests, which are integration tests specifically intended to test offline and online stores, will be run against Feast to ensure that the Feast APIs works with your offline store. The universal tests can be run by running the following commands:

```

> make test-python-integration-container

Reviewer: I don't think this is actually a recommended practice. The author is going to run into issues around authentication for different clouds. What they actually only need is just their offline store, mapped against the stubbed out online stores.

make test-python-universal
```

> The unit tests should succeed, but the universal tests will likely fail. The tests are parametrized based on the `FULL_REPO_CONFIGS` variable defined in `sdk/python/tests/integration/feature_repos/repo_configuration.py`. To overwrite these configurations, you can simply create your own file that contains a `FULL_REPO_CONFIGS`, and point Feast to that file by setting the environment variable `FULL_REPO_CONFIGS_MODULE` to point to that file. The module should add new `IntegrationTestRepoConfig` classes to the `AVAILABLE_OFFLINE_STORES` by defining an offline and online store. In general, use the sqlite online store to test your offline store so that you don't need to setup any other online store containers. The main challenge there will be to write a `DataSourceCreator` for the offline store. In this repo, the file that overwrites `FULL_REPO_CONFIGS` is `feast_custom_offline_store/feast_tests.py`, so you would run

Reviewer: We probably should not recommend a path that we expect to fail. Instead, we should ask them to define this FULL_REPO_CONFIGS_MODULE first

Reviewer: Can we similarly to the rest of the guide also show a code snippet of what this looks like for this example?

Author: done.

```
export FULL_REPO_CONFIGS_MODULE='feast_custom_offline_store.feast_tests'
make test-python-universal
```

to test the offline store against the Feast universal tests. You should notice that some of the tests actually fail. If you have configured the offline stores and only that offline store is being used in `FULL_REPO_CONFIGS`, `make test-python-integration-container` should work as it tests the offline store and online stores that are containerized in Docker. All of the containerized integration tests should pass and if they don't, this indicates that there is a mistake in the implementation of this offline store!

Remember to add your datasource to `repo_config.py` similar to how we added `spark`, `trino`, etc, to the dictionary `OFFLINE_STORE_CLASS_FOR_TYPE` and add the necessary configuration to `repo_configuration.py`. Namely, `AVAILABLE_OFFLINE_STORES` should load your repo configuration module.

### Dependencies

> Finally, if your offline store requires special packages, add them to our `sdk/python/setup.py` under a new `<OFFLINE>_STORE_REQUIRED` list with the packages and add it to the setup script so that if your offline store is needed, users can install the necessary python packages.

Reviewer: should clarify it should go as an extra so it isn't installed by users by default

Author: fixed

You will need to regenerate our requirements files. To do this, create separate pyenv environments for python 3.8, 3.9, and 3.10. In each environment, run the following commands:

```
export PYTHON=<version>
make lock-python-ci-dependencies

> make lock-python-dependencies

Reviewer: the normal lock-python-dependencies shouldn't be needed right?

Author: Yup thx for the catch

```

### Documentation

> Remember to update the documentation for your offline store. This can be found in `docs/reference/offline-stores/` and `docs/reference/data-sources/`. You should also add a reference in `docs/reference/data-sources/README.md` and `docs/SUMMARY.md`. Add a new markdown documentation and document the functions similar to how the other offline stores are documented. Be sure to cover how to create the datasource and most importantly, what configuration is needed in the `feature_store.yaml` file in order to create the datasource and also make sure to flag that the datasource is in alpha development.

Reviewer: nit: "add documentation" instead of update.

There's also additional work around adding python code docs (i.e. call `make build-sphinx`)

Author: added.

> An example of a full pull request for adding a custom offline store can be found [here](https://github.com/feast-dev/feast/pull/2401).

Reviewer: again would not use this as an example because it's too large and hard to parse

Author: addressed above.

## 6. Testing the OfflineStore class

### Integrating with the integration test suite and unit test suite.

Even if you have created the `OfflineStore` class in a separate repo, you can still test your implementation against the Feast test suite, as long as you have Feast as a submodule in your repo. In the Feast submodule, we can run all the unit tests with:

> In order to test against the test suite, you need to create a custom `DataSourceCreator`. This class will need to implement our testing infrastructure methods, `create_data_source` and `created_saved_dataset_destination`. `create_data_source` creates a datasource for testing from the dataframe given that will register the dataframe with your offline store and return a datasource pointing to that location. See `BigQueryDataSourceCreator` for an implementation of a datawarehouse data source creator. **Saved datasets** are special datasets used for data validation and is Feast's way of snapshotting your data for future data validation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In order to test against the test suite, you need to create a custom `DataSourceCreator`. This class will need to implement our testing infrastructure methods, `create_data_source` and `created_saved_dataset_destination`. `create_data_source` should create a datasource forbased on the dataframe passed in. It may be implemented by uploading the contents of the dataframe into the offline store and returning a datasource object pointing to that location. See `BigQueryDataSourceCreator` for an implementation of a data source creator. **Saved datasets** are special datasets used for data validation and is Feast's way of snapshotting your data for future data validation.
```

Author: Fixed

```
make test-python
```

> This should run the unit tests and the unit tests should all pass. Please add unit tests for your data source that test out basic functionality of reading and writing to and from the datasource. This should just be class level functionality that ensures that the methods you implemented for the OfflineStore and the DataSource associated with it work as expected. In order to be approved to merge into Feast, these unit tests should all pass and demonstrate that the DataSource works as intended.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This command runs the python unit tests. It's required that unit tests should all pass for contributed components.

Contributors should add unit tests for contributed data source that test out basic functionality of reading and writing to and from the datasource. This should just be class level functionality that ensures that the methods you implemented for the OfflineStore and the DataSource associated with it work as expected. In order to be approved to merge into Feast, these unit tests should all pass and demonstrate that the DataSource works as intended.
```

Reviewer 2: > test out basic functionality of reading and writing to and from the datasource

This actually is not clear at all. Do you mean the test should write from say bigquery? How is that a unit test then?

Author: Hm, I guess most datasources will not have unit tests then. I guess as long as the offline source passes the integration tests, we can trust the store.

You will need to regenerate our requirements files. To do this, create separate pyenv environments for python 3.8, 3.9, and 3.10. In each environment, run the following commands:

```
export PYTHON=<version>
make lock-python-ci-dependencies
```

### Add Documentation

Remember to add documentation for your offline store. This should be added to `docs/reference/offline-stores/` and `docs/reference/data-sources/`. You should also add a reference in `docs/reference/data-sources/README.md` and `docs/SUMMARY.md`. Add a new markdown documentation and document the functions similar to how the other offline stores are documented. Be sure to cover how to create the datasource and most importantly, what configuration is needed in the `feature_store.yaml` file in order to create the datasource and also make sure to flag that the datasource is in alpha development. Please also add some documentation on what the data model is for the specific online store for more clarity.

> Finally, add the python code docs by running to document the functions:

Reviewer 2: This is not necessary right? i.e. the docs are generated automatically when changes are merged, we just need to make sure they are referenced `sdk/python/docs/index.rst`.

Author: Ok let me update.

## 6. Testing the OfflineStore class

### Integrating with the integration test suite and unit test suite.

Even if you have created the `OfflineStore` class in a separate repo, you can still test your implementation against the Feast test suite, as long as you have Feast as a submodule in your repo. In the Feast submodule, we can run all the unit tests with:

> In order to test against the test suite, you need to create a custom `DataSourceCreator`. This class will need to implement our testing infrastructure methods, `create_data_source` and `created_saved_dataset_destination`. `create_data_source` should create a datasource based on the dataframe passed in. It may be implemented by uploading the contents of the dataframe into the offline store and returning a datasource object pointing to that location. See `BigQueryDataSourceCreator` for an implementation of a data source creator. **Saved datasets** are special datasets used for data validation and is Feast's way of snapshotting your data for future data validation.

Reviewer: This is a pretty big wall of text. Can you make it more like bullets? I like how you handled it previously with the OfflineStore interface method descriptions

Also, `created_saved_dataset_destination` is probably optional right?

```
make test-python
```
This should run the unit tests and the unit tests should all pass.

> The universal tests, which are integration tests specifically intended to test offline and online stores, should be run against Feast to ensure that the Feast APIs works with your offline store. To run the integration tests, you must parametrize the integration test suite based on the `FULL_REPO_CONFIGS` variable defined in `sdk/python/tests/integration/feature_repos/repo_configuration.py` to use your own custom offline store. To overwrite the default configurations, you can simply create your own file that contains a `FULL_REPO_CONFIGS`, and point Feast to that file by setting the environment variable `FULL_REPO_CONFIGS_MODULE` to point to that file. The module should add new `IntegrationTestRepoConfig` classes to the `AVAILABLE_OFFLINE_STORES` by defining an offline and online store. In general, use the sqlite online store to test your offline store so that you don't need to setup any other online store containers. The main challenge here will be to write a `DataSourceCreator` for the offline store. In this repo, the file that overwrites `FULL_REPO_CONFIGS` is `feast_custom_offline_store/feast_tests.py`, so you would run

Reviewer: Same wall of text comment.

Instead of explaining what the user is doing, I think it's actually better to show the example code, and then explain parts of it. This is otherwise pretty hard to follow

make test-python-universal
```

A sample `FULL_REPO_CONFIGS_MODULE` looks something like this:

{% code title="feast/sdk/python/feast/infra/offline_stores/contrib/postgres_repo_configuration.py" %}
```python
from feast.infra.offline_stores.contrib.postgres_offline_store.tests.data_source import (
    PostgreSQLDataSourceCreator,
)

AVAILABLE_OFFLINE_STORES = [("postgres", PostgreSQLDataSourceCreator)]
```
{% endcode %}

to test the offline store against the Feast universal tests. If you have configured the offline stores and only that offline store is being used in `FULL_REPO_CONFIGS`, `make test-python-integration-container` should work as it tests the offline store and online stores that are containerized in Docker. All of the containerized integration tests should pass and if they don't, this indicates that there is a mistake in the implementation of this offline store!

Remember to add your datasource to `repo_config.py` similar to how we added `spark`, `trino`, etc, to the dictionary `OFFLINE_STORE_CLASS_FOR_TYPE` and add the necessary configuration to `repo_configuration.py`. Namely, `AVAILABLE_OFFLINE_STORES` should load your repo configuration module.

### Dependencies

> Finally, if your offline store requires special packages, add them to our `sdk/python/setup.py` under a new `<OFFLINE>_STORE_REQUIRED` list with the packages and add it to the setup script so that if your offline store is needed, users can install the necessary python packages. These packages should be defined as extras so that they are not installed by users by default.

Reviewer: why is offline in brackets? shouldn't it be <offline_store> ?
